# ZShell introduction

In this tutorial, we'll explore how to use Shell in a Linux terminal and demonstrate how users can create Bash scripts that can be executed like regular programs. This knowledge is particularly valuable in the realm of Business Analytics and Information Systems for automating tasks and streamlining processes.

- [ZShell introduction](#zshell-introduction)
  - [Introduction to Using ZShell in the Linux Terminal](#introduction-to-using-zshell-in-the-linux-terminal)
    - [Basic ZShell Commands](#basic-zshell-commands)
    - [Using the Terminal](#using-the-terminal)
  - [Creating and Running ZShell Scripts](#creating-and-running-zshell-scripts)
    - [Step 1: Writing a ZShell Script](#step-1-writing-a-zshell-script)
    - [Step 2: Making the Script Executable](#step-2-making-the-script-executable)
    - [Step 3: Running the Script](#step-3-running-the-script)
  - [Advanced Scripting Concepts](#advanced-scripting-concepts)
  - [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Introduction to Using ZShell in the Linux Terminal

The default shell in most Linux distributions is the Bourne Again SHell (bash). However, many administrators and developers are switching to the more advanced z shell (zsh) for its powerful features and customizability. Zsh offers improvements over bash such as smarter autocompletion, inline globbing, spell correction, and theming support. Key advantages of zsh include:

- Advanced tab completion for quickly invoking commands, options, arguments, and filenames
- Customizable prompts with support for displaying Git branch, command durations etc.  
- Handy path expansion and file globbing capabilities.
- Faster command substitution and arithmetic evaluation
- Extendable with plugins and frameworks like Oh My Zsh

Overall, zsh offers both interactive and scripting performance improvements over bash while retaining nearly identical syntax. Its customizable workflows make it a popular choice among efficiency-focused Linux power users. Considering its advanced completion and productivity features, learning zsh can benefit any Linux administrator or developer, especially in data engineering and analytics contexts.

### Basic ZShell Commands

1. **`pwd`**: Prints the current working directory.
2. **`ls`**: Lists files and directories in the current directory.
3. **`cd`**: Changes the current directory.
4. **`mkdir`**: Creates a new directory.
5. **`touch`**: Creates a new empty file.
6. **`cp`**: Copies files or directories.
7. **`mv`**: Moves or renames files or directories.
8. **`rm`**: Removes files or directories.
9. **`echo`**: Displays a line of text/string that is passed as an argument.
10. **`grep`**: Searches for patterns in files.

### Using the Terminal

To start, open your terminal application. You'll be greeted with a command prompt, where you can type commands.

For example, to list files in your current directory, type `ls` and press Enter. To change to the `Documents` directory, type `cd Documents`.

## Creating and Running ZShell Scripts

ZShell scripts are a series of commands written in a file that can be executed. They are useful for automating repetitive tasks.

### Step 1: Writing a ZShell Script

1. **Create a Script File**: Use `touch` to create a new file. For example, `touch myscript.sh`.
2. **Edit the Script**: Open the file in a text editor. You can use `nano`, a command-line editor, by typing `nano myscript.sh` (NOTE: You can also use VSCode to create scripts, but it's good to know a little about nano as nany is generally always available on any system (while vscode may not, and is less common)).
3. **Write the Script**: At the top of the file, write `#!/bin/zsh`. This is called a shebang line, which tells the system that this file should be run in the ZShell. Below this line, write your commands.

   Example script:

   ```zsh
   #!/bin/zsh
   
   echo "Hello, this is my first script!"
   ```

### Step 2: Making the Script Executable

Before running the script, you need to make it executable. Using the terminal, run the following command inside the folder that contains the script you created in Step 1:

```zsh
chmod +x myscript.sh
```

### Step 3: Running the Script

Run the script by typing `./myscript.sh` in the terminal.

## Advanced Scripting Concepts

1. **Variables**: Store data that can be used in the script.

   ```zsh
   #!/bin/bash
   greeting="Hello, World!"
   echo $greeting
   ```

2. **Conditional Statements**: Execute commands based on conditions.

   ```zsh
   #!/bin/zsh
   read -p "Enter your name: " name
   if [ "$name" != "" ]; then
       echo "Welcome, $name!"
   else
       echo "No name entered."
   fi
   ```

3. **Loops**: Perform repetitive tasks.

   ```zsh
   #!/bin/bash
   for i in {1..5}
   do
       echo "Looping ... number $i"
   done
   ```

4. **Functions**: Reusable code blocks

   ```zsh
   #!/bin/zsh
   print_greeting() {
       echo "Hello, I am a function."
   }
   print_greeting
   ```

5. **User Input**: Interact with the user.

   ```zsh
   #!/bin/zsh
   read -p "Enter your name: " name
   echo "Hello, $name!"
   ```

## Conclusion

Shell scripting is a powerful tool for automating tasks in Linux. By learning to write and execute shell scripts, you can significantly enhance your productivity and efficiency in managing systems and processing data.
