
# Introduction

- First introduced to the world by Solomon Hykes, founder and CEO of a company then called dotCloud, in a five-minute lightning talk at the Python Developers Conference in Santa Clara, California, on March 15, 2013. (watch here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wW9CAH9nSLs)
- Docker is an open-source project that automates the deployment of applications inside software containers, by providing an additional layer of abstraction and automation of operating-system-level virtualization on Linux.
- Docker uses resource isolation features of the Linux kernel such as cgroups and kernel namespaces to allow independent "containers" to run within a single Linux instance, avoiding the overhead of starting and maintaining virtual machines.
- Docker is a tool that can package an application and its dependencies in a virtual container that can run on any Linux server. This helps enable flexibility and portability on where the application can run, whether on-premises, public cloud, private cloud, bare metal, etc.
- Docker is written in Go and takes advantage of several features of the Linux kernel to deliver its functionality.
- Docker is a tool designed to make it easier to create, deploy, and run applications by using containers. Containers allow a developer to package up an application with all parts it needs, such as libraries and other dependencies, and ship it all out as one package.
- Docker is a tool that is designed to benefit both developers and system administrators, making it a part of many DevOps (developers + operations) toolchains.

## Docker Architecture

- Docker uses a client-server architecture. The Docker client talks to the Docker daemon, which does the heavy lifting of building, running, and distributing your Docker containers.
- The Docker client and daemon can run on the same system, or you can connect a Docker client to a remote Docker daemon. The Docker client and daemon communicate using a REST API, over UNIX sockets or a network interface.
- The Docker client can communicate with more than one daemon.
- The Docker daemon is the server that manages Docker objects, such as images, containers, networks, and volumes.
- A Docker container holds everything that is needed for an application to run. This includes the application code, runtime, system tools, system libraries, and settings.
- A Docker image is a read-only template that contains a set of instructions for creating a container that can run on the Docker platform.


  
